{\rtf1\ansi\deff0
{\fonttbl{\f0 Calibri;}{\f1 Consolas;}}
\viewkind4\uc1\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1\lang1033\b Change Description\b0\par
\b Repository:\b0  vscode-sas-extension\par
\b Branch:\b0  feature/png-open-sas-server\par
\b Commit:\b0  5fb7cd5a218fde877f4d616ea7cf880be1d64bd5\par
\b Date:\b0  2026-03-19\par
\par
\b 1. Summary\b0\par
This change enables image files (especially PNG) to open correctly from the SAS explorers by using a binary retrieval path and a local preview flow.\par
\par
Before this change, resources selected from SAS content/server trees used a generic open path that was primarily text-oriented. Binary formats could be opened incorrectly or without the intended preview experience.\par
\par
After this change, image resources are detected by extension, fetched as bytes, written to a local temporary location in extension global storage, and opened with VS Code's image preview editor. Non-image resources continue using the normal open flow.\par
\par
\b 2. Motivation\b0\par
Users expect files such as .png to open as images, not as text. The existing path was not reliably binary-safe across all adapter types.\par
\par
\b 3. Scope\b0\par
This feature is intentionally focused and limited to the resource-open behavior from Content Navigator views.\par
\par
\b Files updated (7):\b0\par
- client/src/components/ContentNavigator/ContentDataProvider.ts\par
- client/src/components/ContentNavigator/ContentModel.ts\par
- client/src/components/ContentNavigator/index.ts\par
- client/src/components/ContentNavigator/types.ts\par
- client/src/connection/itc/ItcServerAdapter.ts\par
- client/src/connection/rest/RestContentAdapter.ts\par
- client/src/connection/rest/RestServerAdapter.ts\par
\par
\b 4. Technical Changes\b0\par
\b 4.1 Command routing in navigator\b0\par
A SAS-specific open command was introduced for tree items. Instead of directly calling vscode.open for every resource, the tree now routes through:\par
\pard\li360\sa120\sl276\slmult1\f1 SAS.content.openResource\f0  or \f1 SAS.server.openResource\f0 \par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1
This command checks extension type. For image extensions (png/jpg/jpeg/gif/bmp/tiff/webp/svg), it triggers binary fetch and image preview; otherwise it falls back to normal open.\par
\par
\b 4.2 Binary content support in model/interface\b0\par
The content adapter interface now includes an optional binary read API:\par
\pard\li360\sa120\sl276\slmult1\f1 getContentOfUriAsBinary?(uri): Promise<Uint8Array>\f0\par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1
ContentModel now exposes \f1 getContentByUriAsBinary\f0  with fallback behavior when an adapter does not implement binary fetch.\par
\par
\b 4.3 Adapter implementations\b0\par
- RestContentAdapter: requests content endpoint with arraybuffer response and converts to Uint8Array.\par
- RestServerAdapter: fetches file content with arraybuffer response, converts to bytes, and keeps metadata updated (including file size).\par
- ItcServerAdapter: retrieves file content to a temp file, reads bytes, cleans up temp artifact, and returns Uint8Array.\par
\par
\b 4.4 Data provider behavior\b0\par
ContentDataProvider now detects likely binary extensions in readFile and uses binary path when needed. Text resources keep the prior text encoding path.\par
\par
\b 5. Functional Outcome\b0\par
- Opening PNG (and other supported image types) from SAS explorers now launches image preview correctly.\par
- Non-image files continue to open with normal editor behavior.\par
- Behavior works across both REST and ITC-backed server/content flows.\par
\par
\b 6. Risk and Mitigation\b0\par
\b Risks:\b0\par
- Extension-based binary detection is heuristic.\par
- Temporary local-file strategy may create short-lived files in global storage.\par
\par
\b Mitigations:\b0\par
- Binary API is optional and has controlled fallback.\par
- Non-image path is unchanged.\par
- Temp file name is sanitized and isolated in extension-managed storage.\par
\par
\b 7. Suggested Validation\b0\par
1. Open .png from SAS Content tree and verify image preview editor opens.\par
2. Open .png from SAS Server tree and verify the same behavior.\par
3. Open a text file (.sas/.txt) and confirm normal editor open still works.\par
4. Confirm no regressions for delete/download/other tree commands.\par
\par
\b 8. Backward Compatibility\b0\par
The change is backward compatible for non-image resources. Existing command patterns are preserved for non-binary use cases.\par
\par
\b 9. Future Improvements (Optional)\b0\par
- Use server-provided MIME type when available instead of extension-only detection.\par
- Add cleanup policy for old preview temp files.\par
- Add explicit tests for image open command routing and binary adapters.\par
}